# Using AX.25 over OrthoMod

> *AX.25 is a HDLC-variant to pass traffic over a physical
> layer, which might use OrthoMod.  How does it work together?*

The AX.25 design version 2.2 involves a "Link Multiplexer" component
that supports the transmission of packets for different data links
over one physical layer.  This allows the co-existence of multiple
data links based on the designations for the transmitter and receiver.

Some data links may also be used in connection-less mode, destined
to transport `UI` frames instead of acknowledged `I` frames.

Generally, the data link can be recognised by the Address Field in an
AX.25 frame.  To distinguish connection-oriented from connection-less
frames, the Control Field must also be interpreted.

Even fragmented frames build the fragments as normal AX.25 frames
that happen to set a special value in the PID Field and introduce a
corresponding interpretation for the Information Field.  But the
Address and Control Fields are set as for `I` and `UI` frames that
were not subjected to fragmentation and reassembly.

The combination of Control Field and Address Field enable us to
derive the
[channel identity](ChannelIdentity.md)
for the receiver.

Finally, AX.25 is usually transmitted with NRZI over something like
BPSK, but for TPSK modulation we do not require (nor desire) NRZI.


## AX.25 Frames and their Channel Identities

The
[channel identities](ChannelIdentity.md)
to use with OrthoMod are derived from the Address and Control Fields
in an AX.25 frame's header.

  * `U` can be connection-oriented or not.  See the subclassses
    below: `UI`, `SABME`, `SABM`, `DISC`, `UA`, `DM`, `FRMR`,
    `XID`, `TEST`.

  * `I` information is a like TCP, in that it supports flow control and
    windowing, and transmissions will be acknowledged.  These frames
    are passed over a connection and will be identified by the
    channel from transmitter to receiver.

  * `S` is the supervisory frame, and is part of connected mode, so
    it is identified by both the transmitter and receiver designation.
    The subclasses of the `S` frame are: `RR`, `RNR`, `REJ`, `SREJ`.

  * `UI` unacknowledged information is like UDP, bypassing flow control
    and windowing and will not be acknowledged.  The frame is not part
    of a connection and may in fact be addressing a group; it will be
    identified by the receiver alone.  Note that a URI scheme may be
    used as a recipient, or the receiver designation need not be an
    amateur radio call sign.

  * `SABM` and `SABME` connect two radios.  The transmitter has
    the designation of the receiver (call sign and station
    number) but the receiver does not know about the transmitter's
    designation.  So, these requests are sent over a channel that
    is identified by the receiver designation alone.

    The difference between `SABM` and `SABME` is their modulus of
    8 and 128, respecively.  After `SABM`, the Control Field is
    8 bits long, and after `SABME` it is 16 bits long.  This impacts
    the control fields for `I` and `S` frames; `U` frames do not hold
    the size-variable `N(R)` and `N(S)` window counter bit fields.

  * `DISC` is a disconnection request between two radios.
    This is part of a connection, and so it is identified by both
    the transmitter and receiver designation.

  * `UA` acknowledges a `SABM`, `SABME` or `DISC` command, and are
    considered part of a connection.  It is identified by both the
    transmitter and receiver designation.

  * `DM` signals that the receiver got a frame for connected mode
    which it was operating in disconnected mode, or when a connection
    attempt is rejected for the time being.  It is not considered
    part of a connection and the response will be identified by
    the receiver (of the `DM`) alone.  Note how this saves the sender
    of the `DM` from having to set up a temporary channel identity
    just for the purpose of rejecting an attempt to open it.

  * `FRMR`, `XID` and `TEST`
    are connected commands, and are identified by the channel
    from transmitter to receiver.

**Addresses:**
The transmitter should be able to find its own designation in
anything that it about to transmit; from the ones it has been
configured for, it would be the one closest to the destination,
but it must not be the destination.

The receiver designation is the AX.25 address that counts as the
next hop after the last hop with the transmitter designation.

Note that the Address Field contains the destination before the
source, then follows with relay station names, so imagine the
relays inserted before the source; then, "closest to the destination"
means "first listed" and "next hop" means "preceding" in terms of
the Address Field and "last hop" is "first in the list".

Note that the encoding in AX.25 for call signs is bit-shifted,
continuation-annotated and space-padded.  None of this is part
of the
[channel identity](ChannelIdentity.md)
derivation.

**Control Fields:**
For channel identities based solely on the receiver designation,
there is no connection.  As a result, the Control Field is of
limited use.  For connected channels however, the Control Field
may be either 8 bits or 16 bits in size, depending on whether it
was setup with the `SABM` or `SABME` command.  The AX.25 protocol
eliminates any conflict so, given a channel, it can be clearly
understood which of these cases applies.  This must be tracked
per channel between a sender and recipient, and used to determine
how to interpret the AX.25 frames flowing over them.  This is a
(slight) complication in the PHY implementation.

